# Etching VLSI Computer Chips

But now we return to the traveling salesman problem itself, and we want to show
that sometimes problems that are not quite the same can still be modeled as
traveling salesman problem, in that  we can use Concorde (or any other general
purpose solver for this problem) to find an optimal solution. Here is such an
example, which arises in the process of manufacturing VLSI computer chips (VLSI
stands for "very large-scale integration", referring to the huge number of
transistors that are integrated on a single chip).  One step of this process
can be viewed in the following simplified way: there is a square (a silicon
wafer) on which one is going to etch a sequence of lines (which correspond to
electrical connections between different components of the chip). The machine
doing the etching first moves to the correct position where the line starts,
etches the particular line (as specified by the design) which leaves it at a
different point in the square. Then it must move to the correct position for
the next line, and so forth. The lines may be etched in any order, but for each
line, the etching must proceed in the specified direction (from the given
starting point to the given ending point). The etching machine must start and
end at the upper left-hand corner of the square (so as not to interfere with
the square being put into and out of position for the etching).  The VLSI
etching optimization problem is to select an order for the lines to be etched
so that as little time as possible is taken.

```{attention} Figure 3: A visualization of the VLSI etching optimization
problem should be here.
```

We will show that this problem can be viewed as a special case of the traveling
salesman problem, or in other words, can be modeled as the traveling salesman
problem.  More precisely, we will show that given any input to the VLSI
problem, we can construct an input for the traveling salesman problem with the
property that an optimal solution for this new input (that is, the cheapest
tour) can be interpreted as an optimal solution for the VLSI problem. Suppose
that $N$ is a variable for the VLSI problem that specifies the number of lines
in the input. From any given input to the VLSI problem with $N$ lines, we will
construct a TSP input with $n=N+1$ cities; city 1 corresponds to the upper
left-hand corner of this chip (at which the machine starts and ends its
etching) and each of cities 2 through $N+1$ corresponds to one of the $N$ lines
in the VLSI input.

The next observation is that in performing the etching of the lines, the
machine's time can be divided into two parts: the time actually etching the
lines and the time moving the machine between lines when it is not actually
etching. No matter what order in which the lines are etched, the time for the
first part is the same. So, to minimize the total time for the machine, we
should just minimize the total time that we are moving the machine without
etching.  If cities $i$ and $j$ both correspond to lines (as opposed to the
special city 1 which corresponds to the upper left-hand corner) then if the
line corresponding to $j$ is etched immediately after the line corresponding
$i$, then we spend the amount of time that it takes to move the machine from
the endpoint of $i$'s line to the starting point of $j$'s line (while not
etching). Similarly, at the start, we move the machine from the upper left-hand
corner to the starting point of the first line etched (while not etching).
Finally, we move the machine from the ending point of the last line etched to
upper left-hand corner (while not etching). All of the periods in which the
machine is not etching are considered in one of these cases.  This motivates us
to define the cost array as follows: let $C[i,j]$ be the time to move the
machine from the ending point of $i$'s line to the starting point of  $j$'s
line, for each  $i=2,\ldots,N+1,\ j=2,\ldots,N+1$; let $C[1,j]$ be the time to
move the machine from the upper left-hand corner to the starting point of $j$'s
line, for each $j=2,\ldots,N+1$; and let $C[i,1]$ be the time to move the
machine from the ending point of $i$'s line to upper left-hand corner, for each
$i=2,\ldots,N+1$.

As we discussed above, $\pi$ can be specified so that the tour starts at any
particular city, and we shall therefore assume that $\pi(1)$ is the special
city $1$.  Our explanation above has shown that the total cost of any tour
$\pi$ is exactly the total time that the machine moves while not etching if the
lines are etched in the order corresponding to $\pi (2),\pi (3), \ldots,
\pi(N+1)$. Consequently, if we find the best tour for the input $C[i,j]$,
$i=1\ldots,N+1$, $j=1,\ldots,N+1$, then this yields the ordering of the lines
for which the total time to etch the chip is minimized.

This completes the explanation that the VLSI etching problem can be modeled by
the traveling salesman problem. Why was this an interesting thing to do? The
traveling salesman problem is an extremely well-studied problem. Thousands of
man-hours have been invested into devising software packages that solve the
traveling salesman problem. By modeling the new problem, the VLSI etching
problem, as a traveling salesman problem, we can build off of that experience,
and just solve our inputs for the etching problem by using the best software
for the traveling salesman problem that we can find. This is one of the main
reasons that is important to identify important models in the first place, so
that we can then use our experience in solving these models to solve other
problems as well.
